Section 2.1 (Centralization Can Be Harmful) copyedits (#22)
rfc-editor/draft-nottingham-avoiding-internet-centralization: draft-nottingham-avoiding-internet-centralization.md

## Centralization Can Be Harmful {#why}

Many engineers who participate in Internet standards efforts have an inclination to prevent and counteract centralization because they see the Internet's history and architecture as incompatible with it. As a "large, heterogeneous collection of interconnected systems" {{?BCP95}} the Internet is often characterized as a "network of networks" whose operators relate as peers that agree to facilitate communication rather than experiencing coercion or requiring subservience to others' requirements. This focus on independence of action is prevalent in the Internet's design -- for example, in the concept of an "autonomous system".

Reluctance to countenance centralization is also rooted in the many potentially damaging effects that have been associated with it, including:

> * _Power Imbalance_: When a third party has unavoidable access to communications, they gain informational and positional advantages that allow observation of behavior (the "panopticon effect") and shaping or even denial of behavior (the "choke point effect") {{INTERMEDIARY-INFLUENCE}}: capabilities that those parties (or the states that have authority over them) can use for coercive ends {{INTERDEPENDENCE}} or even to disrupt society itself. Just as good governance of states requires separation of powers {{FEDERALIST-51}}, good governance of the Internet requires that power not be consolidated in one place without appropriate checks and balances.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* _Power Imbalance_: When a third party has unavoidable access to communications, they gain informational and positional advantages that allow observation of behavior (the "panopticon effect") and shaping or even denial of behavior (the "chokepoint effect"): capabilities that those parties (or the states that have authority over them) can use for coercive ends {{INTERDEPENDENCE}} or even to disrupt society itself. Just as good governance of states requires separation of powers {{FEDERALIST-51}}, good governance of the Internet requires that power not be consolidated in one place without appropriate checks and balances.
```

INTERMEDIARY-INFLUENCE is not the correct reference here, and should be removed; INDEPENDENCE covers it. It uses the phrasing "chokepoint", and since this is a quote, it should appear that way, I think.

* _Monoculture_: The scale available to a centralized provider can magnify minor flaws in features to a degree that can have broad consequences. For example, a single codebase for routers elevates the impact of a bug or vulnerability; a single recommendation algorithm for content can have severe social impact. Diversity in functions’ implementations leads to a more robust outcome when viewed systemically because "progress is the outcome of a trial-and-error evolutionary process of many agents interacting freely." {{POLYCENTRIC}}

* _Self-Reinforcement_: As widely noted (see, e.g., {{ACCESS}}), a centralized provider's access to data allows it the opportunity to make improvements to its offerings, while denying such access to others.
* _Self-Reinforcement_: As widely noted (e.g., see {{ACCESS}}), a centralized provider's access to data allows it the opportunity to make improvements to its offerings while denying such access to others.

> The relationship between these harms and centralization is often complex; it is not always the case that centralization will lead to them, and when it does, there is not always a direct and simple tradeoff.

Reviewer: "harm" is typical in the literature and debate about these matters. What motivates this change?

Reviewer 2: "harms" and "damaging effects" were both used in the document so we made this change for consistency. We will revert this change back to use "harms".
